Q: What is Demul?
A: Demul is Sega's multi-system game console and automaton emulator, originally intended solely to emulate the Sega Dreamcast game console. Currently, the emulator also supports emulation of Sega Dreamcast-based slot machines: Naomi, Naomi 2 and Atomiswave . Support for Sega Model 3, Sega Hikaru, Sega Saturn is under development .

Q: What kind of computer is needed for emulation?
A: The cooler the better. If you have an Athlon, Celeron, or Pentium MMX processor, you're out of luck . If you have integrated Intel video, you can not count on much . If you have a cool configuration, then multiply it by two to play Naomi 2. Some processors (Athlon XP in particular) do not have SSE2 support and cannot be used to run the current version of the emulator.

Q: What is needed for the emulator and plugins to work?
A: For the emulator and plug-ins to work, you need a Windows operating system not lower than XP, for the DX11 plug-in to work - not lower than Vista / 7, as well as the installed package of libraries "Microsoft Visual C ++ 2010 Redistributable Package" from the Microsoft website . For video plug-ins to work, you also need the latest drivers for your video card, as well as the latest ( LATEST ) DirectX . Also, to run emulation, you will need romsets with games (in the case of arcades) or disk images (in the case of Dreamcast) and bios for a specific system.

Q: Why can't I see GPU plugins listed in settings?
A: First you need to check if the plugins are in the folder specified in the settings as the folder for plugins or if it exists in the settings at all. If everything is in order with this, then you need to carefully re-read the previous question-answer. The absence of the necessary components of drivers or DirectX, which are present ONLY in the latest versions, leads to the impossibility of loading the plugin, which means that it is not in the list for selection. Drivers are usually taken from the website of the manufacturer of video cards or laptops, DirectX is easily found on the Microsoft website.
Q: When starting the old version of the emulator, the message "Unable to load" is displayed and the launch stops.
A: "Unable to load" system message that it cannot load one of the required plugins, whose name is not specified in the configuration file. If there is an empty string instead of a file name in the settings, you will receive just such a message. For the emulator to work, all plugins must be registered correctly. If any of the plugins does not automatically appear in the list of available for work, then it cannot be loaded due to the lack of any libraries. In general, you need to install the "Microsoft Visual C++ 2010 Redistributable Package", and for GPU plugins, the latest drivers and DirectX. In newer versions of the emulator, you will receive a more detailed error message: "Unable to load XXX Plugin", where XXX is the designation of a plugin that cannot be loaded.

Q: What is "romset"?
A: A romset is a set of ROM image files containing the game code and game data from the arcade machine. A romset can contain either one or several files with different checksums. Romset files can be either packed into an archive with a ZIP extension and a name corresponding to the name of the romset, or they can be unpacked. The unpacked files that make up the romset must be located in a subdirectory with a name that matches the name of the corresponding archive . This system is identical to the system used in MAME/MESS type emulators for all systems they support. A romset can contain both the data of a particular game and a set of bios for one of the supported systems.

Q: What are "bios"?
A: Bios are ROM image files that contain built-in boot programs necessary for the operation of a particular emulated system, regardless of the game. Without the appropriate set of bios, the launch of the emulator is impossible . The BIOSes for each individual system are grouped into romsets with a short name, usually corresponding to the shortened name of the system. For example, "dc" is a Sega Dreamcast bios romset, "naomi" is a Sega Naomi bios romset, and "awbios" is a Sammy Atomiswave bios romset. Romsets with bios and games are stored and used by the emulator in exactly the same way, they are packed/unpacked accordingly and placed in the same directories (see "What is a "romset"?").

Q: Do I need a flash file to work, like in old emulators?
A: Fundamentally not needed. flash file will be created automatically in the NVRAM folder, like all other files with non-volatile memory images of different games. All the necessary changes are made to it so that there are no problems with setting the time and other things. But no one prevents you from using the original flash image. For the Dreamcast to work, you can take any flash file from any emulator , rename it to "dc.flash" and replace it with the existing one in the NVRAM folder. You don't need a flash file to emulate arcade systems.

Q: How should romsets be named?
A: The names of game romsets and bios romsets are listed in the DAT file for the latest version of the emulator, which can be generated via the command line of the emulator itself with the command "demul.exe -listxml > roms.dat". The parent/clones system allows you to store files that are the same for several romsets in one archive with the name of a common parent. Files that differ from each other are stored separately in romsets with clone names. Matching the name of the romset specified in the DAT file is MANDATORY!To work with the Demul emulator, you can use ready-made sets of romsets belonging to the MAME emulator, except in rare cases when the required romset does not exist in MAME (for example, bios for Sega Dreamcast). GD-ROM versions of Naomi/Naomi 2 games are supported in Demul both as CHD images from the MAME set and as custom romsets.

Q: How should the bios files and other files inside romsets be named?
A: The preferred names of BIOS files and files in romsets are also indicated in the DAT file and are most often identical to the names from the corresponding romsets of MAME / MESS emulators, from where they were borrowed. The system for downloading files from romsets in the Demul emulator since version 0.5.6 ignores the names of files inside a romset packed in a zip archive, comparing only their checksums. Thus, within each such romset, the file names can be arbitrary , the program itself will find the one you need by its checksum. This also applies to bios for different systems. This property does not apply to unpacked romsets, for such matching of file names specified in the DAT file is MANDATORY!

Q: Where to put bios and romsets?
A: Game romsets and bios romsets are placed in one or several different directories, the paths to which are specified in the program settings. In total, you can set up to five different directories, each of which will search for the file you need to download. Thus, it is possible to store bios romsets and game romsets in different folders, as well as store MAME and non-MAME romsets separately. Also, the directory where the full MAME romset is located is suitable as a directory for most romsets. The program will automatically find the files it needs.

Q: I downloaded the correct bios, named them according to the DAT file, but the emulator says that it cannot find the "dc101d_us.bin" file in the "dc" romset?
A: In this case, this message means that the emulator cannot find the Dreamcast bios file with the specified checksum, and not specifically the file with that name. For each of the bioses in the database, two possible variants of the name are set - the main and the alternative. The alternative matches the filenames in the romset of the MESS emulator. Since the search for an alternative name in the romset is performed last, a message appears about the impossibility of finding exactly the above file. In general, the emulator gives a message that it cannot find any file when the desired file in the given romset or the romset itself in a packed or unpacked form was not found . This means that none of the paths specified in the settings of the file with the required checksum exists.. This means that you either did not specify one of the paths to the necessary files, or the name of the romset does not match what is written in the DAT. The file name in the message makes it possible to find the desired file in the romsets of other emulators.

Q: The new version does not work for me, but the old one works fine with the same settings.
A: For any new version of the emulator , you must delete the old configuration files and reconfigure the emulator to avoid conflicts between some of the settings that have changed in the new version and the remnants of the old ones. In the latest versions of the emulator, you also need to clear the "scache" shader cache folder.

Q: I can't set up the keyboard for the game.
A: First of all, it should be clarified that the "Keyboard" option in the plugins and controllers settings in the drop-down list along with the "Joystick" is used to assign one of the ports of the emulated set-top box to the corresponding input device. Selecting this item will connect a virtual keyboard to the emulated Dreamcast . This in no way means that the keyboard is selected to control the emulator. Emulator control is set to keyboard and joystick at the same time by default. Any keyboard or joystick button (except analog triggers) can be assigned to any button on the Dreamcast or arcade virtual controller. The PC keyboard buttons in the Dreamcast/Naomi keyboard emulation are transferred directly to the emulated system without modification and do not require additional configuration.

Q : Are there any hotkeys to control the emulator?
A : In addition to customizable quick save / load keys and change the save slot, there are several fixed control buttons: F3 - enable / disable the menu in windowed mode. F5 - rotate the screen, F6 - change the current aspect ratio of the image, F9 - screenshot (except for the DX11 plugin), F11 - turn on / off the display of the light gun crosshair, Alt + Enter - switch to full screen mode and back, and finally Pause - pause / continue emulation .

Q: The NAOMI/NAOMI2 game gives a message after the bios splash screen: "CAUTION 51. ...".
A: The game requires changing the number of players in the system configuration of the arcade machine. You can do this in the Naomi BIOS system menu. Demul provides automatic adjustment of system parameters to games from the current emulator romset. At the same time, if the settings file with the name of the specified game already exists in the "nvram\" folder, the automatic adjustment will be skipped. To activate it, you need to erase the previously saved settings file.

Q: The NAOMI/NAOMI2 game gives a message after the bios splash screen: "CAUTION 53. SET MONITOR FREQUENCY TO 31HZ(15Hz)".
A: The game requires switching the video signal output mode with a jumper on the rear panel of the system unit. You can select the required mode in the "Configure->Naomi" menu.

Q: The NAOMI/NAOMI2 game gives a message after the bios splash screen: "CAUTION 54. ...".
A: The game requires changing the monitor orientation from portrait to landscape or vice versa. You can do this in the Naomi BIOS system menu. Demul provides automatic adjustment of system parameters for games from the current emulator romset. At the same time, if the settings file with the name of the specified game already exists in the "nvram\" folder, which was saved earlier, automatic adjustment will be skipped. To activate it, you need to erase the previously saved settings file.
